---
layout: post
title:  Super pro testing with fixture
---

We made some progress with testing, but really, we need to be able to write to and read from a database. For that, we're going to use **fixtures**. Fixtures are a way of setting the system up with some mock data, where we know exactly what said data is and it's the same every time, so we can make our assertions against that.

Fixtures is a library that Union Of RAD supply:

{% highlight bash %}
cd app/libraries
git clone https://github.com/UnionOfRAD/li3_fixtures.git
{% endhighlight %}

What a fixture is is a set of data. We have a few things to do first.

In app/config/bootstrap/connections.php, we're going to define a new connection. What we're going to do is have an in-memory database using SQLite3. If you have't got [SQLite](http://www.sqlite.org/) installed, do it now! SQLite is a great tool for testing because it works pretty much like any other relational database, but you can store it in memory so it's nice and clean and it's all gone after the test run - the perfect crime!

In app/config/bootstrap/connections.php, add:

{% highlight php %}
<?php

// ...
 Connections::add('test', array(
 	'type' => 'database',
 	'adapter' => 'Sqlite3',
 	'host' => 'localhost',
 	'login' => 'root',
 	'password' => '',
 	'database' => 'staff',
 	'encoding' => 'UTF-8'
 ));
?>
{% endhighlight %}

So, this is in addition to the MySQL connection "default" that we already have defined, so now you have TWO connections. What we need to do is tell our tests to use the right one so we don't throw away or create data accidentally in our dev workspace!

In app/tests/fixture/StaffFixture.php, put the following code:

{% highlight php %}
<?php
namespace app\tests\fixture;

class StaffFixture extends \li3_fixtures\test\Fixture {

    protected $_model = 'app\models\Staff';

    protected $_fields = array(
		'id' => array('type' => 'id'),
		'name' => array('type' => 'string'),
		'notes' => array('type' => 'string'),
		'department' => array('type' => 'string'),
    );

    protected $_records = array(
		array('id' => 1, 'name' => 'Foobar', 'notes' => 'some stuff2'),
		array('id' => 2, 'name' => 'Bazbip', 'notes' => 'some other stuff')
    );
}
?>
{% endhighlight %}

What we've just defined here is a fixture for the Staff model that has some canned data in the **$_records** field. We've got two users that we've created there called "Foobar" and "Bazbip". Next thing we're going to do is to run the controller's index method using this test data. Back over to app/tests/cases/controllers/StaffController.php:

{% highlight php %}
<?php
namespace app\tests\cases\controllers;

use app\controllers\StaffController;
use lithium\action\Request;
use li3_fixtures\test\Fixtures;

class StaffControllerTest extends \lithium\test\Unit {
    public function setUp() {
        Fixtures::config(array(
            'db' => array(
                'adapter' => 'Connection',
                'connection' => 'test',
                'fixtures' => array(
                    'staff' => 'app\tests\fixture\StaffFixture',
                )
            )
        ));
        Fixtures::save('db');
    }

    public function tearDown() {
        Fixtures::clear('db');
    }

	public function testIndexListsStaffInTheDatabase() {
		$request = new Request();
		$request->data = array();
		$controller = new StaffController(array('request' => $request));

		$result = $controller->index();
		$this->assertEqual("Foobar", $result['staffs'][1]->name);
		$this->assertEqual("Bazbip", $result['staffs'][2]->name);
		$this->assertNull($result['staffs'][3]);
 	}
//	public function testView() {}
//	public function testAdd() {}
//	public function testEdit() {}
//	public function testDelete() {}
}
?>
{% endhighlight %}

So I've chucked out the testIndex method and written testIndexListsStaffInTheDatabase, which is pretty similar but we're actually verifying the results that come from the SQLite3 database come through correctly. The setUp method is saying "hey let's use the test database and let's load the Staff Fixture into it". The tearDown method clears out the database that's connected to in setUp.

> Exercise: using this test connection from within your unit test, run Staff::all(); and print out their names. You should see that they're coming from the test connection. This is cool because we've swapped the connection out for testing so we don't have to change our code.

So now, we've got a pretty cool test that has a temporary database, puts some data in there, then runs the controller using that temporary database and checks the output. Nice!

	$ ./libraries/lithium/console/li3 test app/tests/cases/controllers/StaffControllerTest.php
	----
	Test
	----

	...

	OK

	3 / 3 passes
	0 fails and 0 exceptions

## Notes on running tests in Lithium

* Each "test*" method has setUp automatically run before it and tearDown run at the end.
* If you're used to PHPUnit, one quirk of Lithium's testing is that, if you're expecting it to stop if an assertion fails! It'll carry on executing the test!

> If you want more detail on fixtures (and I'd say it's a good thing to get fixated on), check out [li3 fixtures](https://github.com/UnionOfRAD/li3_fixtures) on Github and read through the documentation.
