---
layout: post
title:  Logging
---

It's extremely important to have logging in your application - things WILL go wrong, and the more insight you have into problems, the better.

Check out [Lithium's Logger.php](https://github.com/UnionOfRAD/lithium/blob/master/analysis/Logger.php) - this well-documented class is a good place to start to learn about logging in detail. We're going to add a few basic log messages to our app!

Good news, everybody! It's REALLY EASY to configure logging in Lithium!

OK first up we modify `app/config/bootstrap.php` and add an include:

{% highlight php %}
<?php
// ...

/**
 * This file contains configuration for logging
 */
require __DIR__ . '/bootstrap/logging.php';

// ...
{% endhighlight %}

Then, hit [http://employee-rolodex.localhost/employees](http://employee-rolodex.localhost/employees). You should see an error message:

	Warning: require(/var/www/employee-rolodex/app/config/bootstrap/logging.php): failed to open stream: No such file or directory in /var/www/employee-rolodex/app/config/bootstrap.php on line 62

	Fatal error: require(): Failed opening required '/var/www/employee-rolodex/app/config/bootstrap/logging.php' (include_path='.:/usr/share/php:/usr/share/pear') in /var/www/employee-rolodex/app/config/bootstrap.php on line 62

Now we create `app/config/bootstrap/logging.php` with these contents:

{% highlight php %}
<?php
use lithium\analysis\Logger;

Logger::config(array(
	'default' => array('adapter' => 'Syslog'),
	'problems' => array(
		'adapter' => 'File',
		'priority' => array('emergency', 'alert', 'critical', 'error')
	)
));
?>
{% endhighlight %}

OK, now we're going to modify `app/controllers/EmployeesController.php` a bit:

{% highlight php %}
<?php
namespace app\controllers;

use app\models\Employees;
use lithium\action\DispatchException;
use lithium\analysis\Logger;

class EmployeesController extends \lithium\action\Controller {

	public function index() {
		$employees = Employees::all();
		Logger::alert('Someone listed users...');
		return compact('Employees');
	}

    // ...
{% endhighlight %}

Now, hit the URL [http://employee-rolodex.localhost/employees](http://employee-rolodex.localhost/employees) to trigger a log write.

Finally, from the terminal, let's have a look at our log file:

	$ cat app/resources/tmp/logs/alert.log
	2013-12-25 10:47:58 Someone listed users...

_Yes, I am writing this on Christmas day!_

> *Did something go wrong?* Make sure `app/resources/tmp/logs` exists and is writeable by your web user.

Right, so what did we do here? Well, we defined two logging destinations - one to the system log, for all logging, and the other, 'problems', to a File. Lithium's File logger will log to `app/resources/tmp/logs/{message type}.log`. Because we used `Logger::alert`, it created `alert.log`. If we used "error", it would write to "`error.log`". Notice also this line:

		'priority' => array('emergency', 'alert', 'critical', 'error')

here, we can see that the file logger is only "paying attention" to 4 types of log events (called "message priority levels". The message priority levels which Logger supports are `emergency`, `alert`, `critical`, `error`, `warning`, `notice`, `info` and `debug`. By saying `Logger::alert('Someone listed users...');`, we are using the `alert` level. We could equally to `Logger::critical` or `Logger::debug`.

## Over to you!

That was pretty straightforward, right? At this point, I suggest adding logging to the methods of our controller. Don't worry, I'll wait while you do :-)
